# DSCI 599 Final Project
## Title: Feature Selection Using Information Gain for Anomaly Detection
## Diana Pham

### Summary
This paper will focus on recreating the results from the research paper, CICIDS-2017 Dataset Feature Analysis with Information Gain for Anomaly Detection by Kurniabudi, D. Stiawan, et al \cite{9142219}. The research investigates the effectiveness of Information Gain in selecting relevant features for anomaly detection in network traffic. By systematically analyzing feature groups and their impact on detection performance, the study aims to enhance anomaly detection capabilities in complex datasets. Since anomaly detection is vital across various domains for identifying deviations from normal behavior that may indicate security threats or fraud, prioritizing relevant features that contribute most to distinguishing between normal and anomalous instances could lead to improved accuracy and reliability of anomaly detection.

There are four key stages for this research’s experiment: data selection and pre-processing, feature selection using information gain, classification with four algorithms (Random Forest, Random Tree, Naive Bayes, and XGBoost), and evaluating the classifiers. For the feature selection stage, it will be implemented by ranking features based on their relevance and then grouping features together based on their weight scores, resulting in several feature subsets. The performance of feature subsets, classified by Random Forest (RF), Random Tree (RT), Naive Bayes (NB), and XGBoost (XGB), is evaluated using metrics like Accuracy, F1 Score, and execution time.

This experiment faced several challenges, with the major issue being the different between Python and Weka, the software that the original authors used to conduct their analysis. In addition, balancing feature selection to avoid over fitting or under fitting the model while maintaining interpretability is crucial, and expert intervention is needed to determine the minimum weight value that decides how the features are grouped together. In addition, careful consideration of evaluation metrics is also required to accurately assess the model's effectiveness in anomaly detection. Overall, overcoming these challenges will lead to a more robust anomaly detection system with significant real-world implications.
